In this lesson we're going to apply all our Python programming knowledge to do the regression and analyze
the data from a 1968 American study on how drugs affect math test scores.
So we're going to be writing some Python code to visualize and plot our data and then we're going to
run a linear regression to look at how well drug concentration in the tissue affects test performance
but before we do that let's chat a little bit about the dataset that we're going to be using for this
exercise.
I was actually genuinely surprised when I found out that research like this even exists.
But then again maybe the late 1960s where a different time in the United States in the original research
paper the three academics by the names of Faulkner icon John Yang and Bing get five male volunteers
to sit math tests after being injected with drugs.
Now I reckon the fact that these drugs were administered intravenously speaks way more for the commitment
of these five blokes than sitting math tests voluntarily handing out the specific drug in question is
called and I hope I pronounced this right.
D ly surging acid dye ethyl a mild or LSD 25 which Koogle tells me is a pretty potent hallucinogen and
the way that this experiment worked is that these five blokes had to give seven blood samples after
being injected with LSD.
The amount of drugs that each dude was injected was actually proportional to their body weight so that
each volunteer should be roughly affected more or less equally.
The blood samples were taken from the volunteers after five minutes half an hour two hours four hours
and again after eight hours.
Now if you remember this is what you see in the first column of our data.
Data from the second column labelled LSD on a school p p m is the tissue concentration of the drug measured
in parts per million and after each blood sample was taken.
The volunteers were sat down for a total of three minutes to solve as many arithmetic math problems
as possible.
And this brings me to our third column in the data frame.
I've labeled this average under school math underscore test on the school school and the way these numbers
are calculated is that first off the number shown in the column is actually the average of the five
guys in the experiment.
The second thing to note about these numbers is that the school is expressed as a percentage value and
it's not like the number of questions that they got right.
But it's a percentage of the control value.
In other words the researchers knew how well people fared on average on their arithmetic tests and they
compared the performance of the volunteers against that against the control test scores.
Another way to think about this is that if there were 10 questions and the control group got around
nine of them right then the volunteers got about three or thirty two point nine percent of the questions
right 240 minutes or four hours into the experiment.
Okay so we've imported pandas in our notebook and then we called the read CSB function to store our
data in a data frame called data.
How we've been messing around with our data quite a bit.
So if you're curious what your data frame looks like at the bottom of your notebook then type data and
press shift enter.
If you just started this lesson and have not run the cells above then the Jupiter notebook will not
recognize this variable in this case.
You'll get a name error which means you have to go to cell and go to run all
so that's a good thing to check if you're coming back to the Python intro.
After taking a break here we can see what our data looks like right.
We've got three columns and we're going to extract each column and put it into a separate variable.
The first column I'm going to extract is gonna be called time.
And I'm gonna set it equal to data square brackets and then when I pass in the name I'm going to say
time on a score delay on the school in a school minutes minute shift and to see what it looks like.
If I want to know what it looks like I can simply say print time.
And here it is our variable called Time now contains a series containing the values of the first column.
Let's do the same thing with the other two columns.
So I want to create a variable called LSD set it equal to data square brackets and it was Ellis the
underscore P p.m. And the third variable I'm going to create and then call school I'm going to set equal
to data square brackets and then average math
score I'm going to hit shift enter to make sure I haven't made any typos and this gives me confidence
that my Python code is working.
Now we're ready to start looking at our data in a graphical way.
If you recall from previous lessons we've imported our plotting module as P.L. t so we can refer to
our PI plot as PDT and visualize the data in these variables.
So the easiest way to do this is to type peel T dot plot and supply into two things that we want to
see.
Let's say we want to look at the time vs. the amount of LSD in people's tissues hitting shift into doesn't
show me anything.
And that's because we need to give our pipeline the instruction to show us the graph so going to write
PDT don't show
and this gives me a graph that looks like this what this plot is showing us is the amount of elastic
tissue concentration over time.
So we've got eight data points and we're simply plotting a line chart for the x axis on this chart we
have supplied our time for the y axis we have supplied our unless the variable.
Now check this out at the moment our plot takes two arguments right time and LSD.
However we're not limited to just providing these two we can actually provide more arguments including
an argument for the color of the graph.
So I'm going to put a comma here and write.
Color equals and then single quotes G GEE IF I HAD shift end to now we see the line color change to
green.
Now a reasonable question to ask is How did you know that you can supply a color argument with a keyword
just like this.
And the answer is I didn't know until I looked at the official documentation that's available for Pi
plot.
Being able to read and interpret the official documentation that's available for each of these components
is one of the key skills at getting good at Python programming so check this out.
We're gonna head down to the part of the documentation that gives us information on the plotting method.
This is the part of the documentation where we can find out more about the plotting method.
We've got the name of our method up here namely plot hand inside the parentheses.
We can see it take some arguments.
Now the documentation provide some examples as well as information about what these arguments could
be.
The first thing that we did was that we plotted time vs. drug concentration in tissue so we just had
two arguments hand in the documentation.
We can see that this is the way to create a plot using the default styles and colors.
However in addition to these standard x and y arguments we can supply some additional arguments.
This is where we come across this term called K W args k w args is an abbreviation for keyword arguments.
Add an example of a keyword argument is r color scrolling down.
We can also see that G is a supported color abbreviation hence scrolling down even further we can see
a handy list of the keyword arguments that we can use on our plot method so right here we can see that
color is one of these keyword arguments but there are others too.
For example line style or line width.
Let's add the line with keyword argument to our Python code.
Now here's how we can do it.
We'll just add a comma and then write.
Line width equals.
I don't know say 10
hitting shift enter updates the chart hand.
Well we can see that now it has a very very thick green line in it.
Ten is probably a little bit too thick for my taste.
I'm going to go with three.
There you go.
This is not so bad.
The other thing to think about with visualization and looking at data is that design is actually quite
important in data visualization because if you think about it the end goal is showing our data to people
and that's why we both need to make it look clear and we need to make it look pretty because typically
you and I are gonna be in a position where we're going to have to press both our bosses and our customers
have everybody judges a book by its cover I'm afraid so our chant is going to have to look a lot better
than it is right now.
The first thing to note is that we're going to add text to our chart.
We have to add labels to these axes and a title to the chant so that people know what it is they're
actually looking at.
The second thing is that we don't actually have to stick to the default colors.
We don't have to stick to a generic green or red.
We can add a custom color and we do that by supplying a colors hex code.
So here's a mini crash course in design a hex code looks something like this.
It has a little hash tag and then it has one two three four five numbers or digits that come after it
and other words a hex code is just like a particular I.D. for a color.
Now what you'll want to do is you'll want to go to a Web site like say flat UI colors to grab these
hex codes of colors that have already been curated for you because quite frankly these colors look really
really good.
So let's grab the hex code for this.
Read this alpha in here and then when we go back to our plot we can supply this hex code instead of
this g hitting shift enter.
I can see that now my line has been updated to this beautiful red.
I have a great resource to be aware of to find beautiful colors by the way is a website called material
palette.
If you want to include more than one color in your chart you can click on two of these.
And you'll get an eight color color palette that you can use in your designs these kind of tricks are
really handy for making something look beautiful really really quickly.
So let's add some text to our graph.
First off I'm going to give this graph a title so going to say PDT dot title parentheses single quotes
tissue concentration
of LSD over time and then I'll shift enter Excellent.
But I do think that this title is a little bit small.
So again we're gonna use a keyword argument to set the font size here.
So the arguments name is font size.
No surprises the elements that the font size 2 17 hitting shift enter updates.
My chart.
Now let's put some labels on these axes
for the X axes will right peel T dot X label parentheses single quotes time in minutes and we'll set
the font size for that equal to say 14 hitting shift and to can see our change right away.
So now our x axis has a nice looking label when it do the same thing for our y axis.
And notice how every time we write peel T which is our object put a dot after it and then we're calling
a method on our object
so to put that y label on they're going to see peeled heat up y labels single quotes tissue
tissue Alice the P M
font size equals 14.
There you go.
Now these aren't the only ways of adding text to our graph by the way.
We can also add text in freeform more or less so if you want to add a little footnote to the graph we
can do that and have it display where our data came from.
So let's take a look at the documentation for adding arbitrary text to our graph.
Here we can see that our text method has multiple arguments that it takes some of these are optional
and some of these are required.
The first thing you'll notice is that we have to supply an x value and a y value.
These are the coordinates of where the text should be in the picture and the second thing that you'll
notice is that the X stands for string.
And this is just the piece of text that should be displayed.
So we have to supply coordinates for the text as well as what the text should be.
Let's try this out.
So coming back here we can see PDT.
Don't text.
Now I don't know exactly where the text should go so going to say X is gonna be equal to zero.
Y is gonna be equal to zero and our string text itself is gonna read VoG are at 0.
Nineteen sixty eight
maybe some parentheses here as well.
Let's press shift enter now and see where these 0 0 coordinates actually are scrolling down.
I can see that it places the text right here.
If X is equal to zero and y is equal to zero let's see what happens when y is equal to say 5 when y
is equal to find if it moves our text up here and when y is equal to say negative 1 I can see that it
moves our text down here.
So this is pretty good we know where the origin is.
We know that positive number moves the text up and a negative number on the y value moves the text down.
Reckon that a good amount for this y value might be something like zero point five try to get this arranges
it very nicely.
Now at the moment our font size for this piece of text is the default font size.
We can set our own value again by providing the font size argument and say setting it to twelve there
we go how it since we're setting the font size on a lot of things.
We can also specify the font size of these numbers that are on the axes.
Say we wanted the numbers on the axis to be the same font size as the label here.
So I could write something like BLT daunt X takes parentheses font size equals 14 and peel t taught
16 parentheses font size equals 14.
If a hit shift entered now we can see that the numbers now have the same size as our labels and another
thing that we can do on these axes is to set hard values for the range that they should cover.
So for example we know that our time delay in minutes is going to be between zero and 500.
And we also know that the parts per million are going to be between one and say six point five or seven
to set a hard range.
We can write something like T dot y limb limb for limit and provide two values a lower bound which is
say one and an upper bound which is to say I don't know seven hitting shift enter.
We can now see that our chart has updated so it's no longer determining automatically what the range
of values should be.
That should be displayed on the y axis.
We have now specified our own range that we'd like to show namely we'd like to have the chance to show
the values between 1 and 7 we can do the same thing for the x axis by writing PDT dot excellent and
providing a lower bound of zero and an upper bound of 500.
The reason I'm trying to show all this is to get this idea across that we're kind of breaking up our
Python code into two sections if you will for the chart we're doing the styling and then down here we're
actually plotting the data.
And what's interesting to note about this is that the amount of code that's written to style the chant
is actually getting longer and longer and longer.
This is one of the reasons why that plot lib comes with something called built in styles these built
in styles can act as a shortcut or a template to help you reduce the amount of code that you need to
write to make something look pretty.
In our previous lessons we've used the 538 style for our chart but there is actually many other styles
that you can choose from one of the handy things to look at is actually the style of gallery.
And here you can see for example the name of the style.
So the first one it's called B MH and the second one's called Classic.
And the third one is called Donk on the school background and you can scroll down to see what these
different styles translate into if you're actually going to plot a chant.
Now mind you this is actually an unofficial style guide that I found very very helpful.
The official one looks something like this how I find both of these really really helpful in deciding
what kind of template I should go with for my chance to apply any of these particular styles to your
chart.
All you have to do is write PDT dot style.
Don't use and then provide the name of the particular template.
So say we use classic if I had shift enter.
I can see my chart update.
This is what it would look like using the classic style.
Of course you can put anything you want in here.
So if you wanted to use say doc on a school background which is the name of another style then we'll
get this
I think one of the other names that I saw on the gallery was G.G. plot.
So we just had shift enter here.
Now one thing you'll notice is that maybe the style won't be applied right away.
So if you see that happen to you just click into the cell and it shift into again.
Then you should see the style applied.
So I'm going to go with classic
how the last thing we'll do with our plotting code is add a line of code into the cell so that our beautiful
chance can be exported when we export our notebook.
You see at the moment our chants are generated when this code is run but if we a percentage sign and
then bright matte plot lib space in line then we are telling Jupiter notebook to export these chants
along with the notebook when we go to file download as notebook.
In other words this line of code here is Jupiter notebook specific.
Now it's time to run our regression.